---
date: 2022-09-04T15:48
tags:
  - language
  - japanese
  - timeline
---

# Learning to Output

### Index:

 * [Introduction](#intro)
 * [Three Aspects of Natural Output](#three-aspects)
   * [Grammatical Correctness](#grammatical-correctness)
   * [Correct use of words and collocations](#correct-use-of)
   * [Appropriate social framing and behavior](#appropriate-social)
 * [Practical activities to improve your Output](#practical-activities)
   * [Noticing](#noticing)
   * [Conversation practice](#conversation-practice)
   * [Self-corrected writing](#self-corrected)
   * [Attentive Listening](#attentive-listening)
   * [Predictive Listening](#predictive-listening)
   * [Active Production](#active-production)
   * [Internal Narration](#internal-narration)
   * [Reading before going to sleep](#reading-before)
   * [Feeling of community](#feeling-of-community)

## <a name="intro">Introduction</a>

There comes a point to any “immersion heavy” language learner where they have
to dip their feet into the scary land of **Output**. While input is more or
less a “solved” problem, output seems to still be a very hot topic among
language learning communities because it revolves around so many different
variables, and touches on so many different emotional aspects and vibes that
each student has with the language and its culture. It is hard to make general
statements that will apply to everyone. This is a journey that each person has
to go through at their own pace and to their own comfort level.

But first, let me define what I actually mean when I use the word **output**
throughout this page:
 * Output is the ability to put together words and sentences in order to convey
   a message in the most natural way possible.

Let me be clear, this page on output **does not** touch on the phonetic aspects
of the language. It is not going to talk about pitch accent (see: [[0308ae14]]),
intonation, diction, etc. While those are all important parts of the language,
they are not related to the actual ability to **put together** a sentence. They
can be studied separately and there’s many other guides and pronunciation
coaches out there that can help you achieve that. This is not the purpose of
this page.

There can be multiple ways to output, for different kinds of platforms,
audiences, and styles. Writing a chat message is output. Talking with a friend
is output. Making a youtube video monologue is output. Streaming on Twitch to 0
viewers is output. Writing a blog is output. Tweeting is output. Both text and
voice, synchronous or asynchronous, count as output. Each of these things have
different aspects that can make them harder or easier, but they all effectively
boil down to one core skill: your ability to manipulate constructs and phrases
of the language that you have previously internalized (passive language), and
quickly draw upon them to convey your own message (active language) in your own
style.

For this reason, if you want to be able to output naturally it is absolutely
**mandatory** to have achieved at least a solid understanding of the language
and have internalized some intuitive model subconsciously.
**Input is a necessary prerequisite to output**. After all, you cannot say
things you don’t yourself already understand. As a rule of thumb, if you find
yourself constantly flipping through the pages of a dictionary (like jisho.org)
looking for a Japanese word to translate a certain English word you have in
mind, you’re approaching this incorrectly (more on this later).  On the other
hand, it is also important to be aware that only relying on input with no
practice will not magically make you able to output.
**You need to practice output to become good at outputting**.

I recommend any learner who wants to integrate the output tips on this page to
at least have reached the second step of the [[58465ab9]]. Ideally, you should
be at the point where you can consume some Japanese media somewhat comfortably
(within your area of interest), and regularly do so in your everyday life. If
you are at a point where you can read a random Japanese sentence and go
“This sentence feels off to me” then you’re ready to output. You don’t need to
know **what** feels off, or why, but you need to have that feeling within you to
be able to apply it to a lot of the exercises I will be introducing later.

**DISCLAIMER**: While some may say you should wait to output until you’re
“ready”, I don’t think this matters as much. You should not **force** yourself
to output but there’s also no real downside if you want to engage in
conversation (ideally with a native speaker) even at a low level of intuition.
However, keep in mind that it will be **much easier** and way more beneficial if
you prioritize your input early on, before you jump into output.

## <a name="three-aspects">Three Aspects of Natural Output</a>

Before we dive into practical advice and exercises to improve on output, it is
a good idea to actually understand **what** output is and which aspects one
needs to focus on for it to be “natural”.

As I already mentioned in the introduction, I will not touch on actual
pronunciation and phonetics. These are incredibly important aspects of the
language if one wants to appear natural, but they belong to an entirely
different area. I’m only focusing on the production abilities of a language
learner: their ability to put  together pieces they acquired from immersion in
a manner that appears natural.

With this in mind, we can recognize three fundamental components of natural
output:
 - Grammatical correctness
 - Correct use of words and collocations
 - Appropriate social framing and behavior

### <a name="grammatical-correctness">Grammatical Correctness</a>

This is probably the easiest part to understand and one that most people would
likely already know about. Simply put, you need to be able to output
grammatically correct sentences. To give a simple example, if you say something
like 美味しいだ, it would come across as extremely wrong because you cannot put
だ after い-adjectives. Any native speaker would be able to instantly point out
that this sentence is wrong and it would give them a feeling of discomfort.

Note, however, that sometimes correct output **can** be grammatically incorrect.
For example you might see a native speaker say things like すごい美味しい
instead of すごく美味しい. While it’s technically grammatically wrong, it’s
actually become normal modern Japanese usage to the point where if you were to
say すごく美味しい instead it could come across as weird.

Knowing which part of grammar **must** be correct and which part is allowed to
be more flexible also will come to you with experience and intuition. You will
internalize the rules subconsciously with enough input, and often you will not
even be able to explain **why** they work like that, just that they
**feel better** that way.

### <a name="correct-use-of">Correct use of words and collocations</a>

It goes without saying that even if your grammar is completely perfect and
natural, your sentences can come across as extremely unnatural if you use the
wrong words. On top of it being unnatural, it can even lead to actual
misunderstandings, so it’s important to be very careful on this aspect.

Generally speaking, even before we internalize things as grammar, languages are
built upon “chunks” or groups of phrases/expressions that a native speaker can
recognize as familiar. There are a lot of phrases even in English where if you
were to break them down into their own individual components and words, you
might not even be able to define **what** they actually mean.

To give you an example, how often have you seen the verb “to bode” in English
without the word “well” after it? And specifically in a negative nuance like
“This does not bode well”. If you were to ask me, I would have no idea what
“bode” meant in English, but I am very familiar with the expression “to (not)
bode well”. Imagine you’re talking with an English learner and they said
something like “The weatherman boded good weather for tomorrow”. While, yes,
it’s technically a correct sentence, it feels off. At the very least it feels
inappropriate for the level of speech and register we expect them to be using.
This is because subconsciously our brains are just very advanced predicting
machines: when we talk to someone we are constantly playing a mental game of
prediction where we try to stay a couple of steps ahead of the conversation in
order to know what to **expect** from our conversational partner. When these
collocation rules are broken, we suddenly feel lost and confused, and the
language will be perceived as unnatural.

This is also strengthened when it comes to set phrases and expressions like
“to kill two birds with one stone”. If I said “to kill two birds with one
rock” it would be wrong, despite the meaning being exactly the same.

### <a name="appropriate-social">Appropriate social framing and behavior</a>

This point is much trickier to grasp and often gets confused with the previous
one about word choice and expressivity. No language exists in a vacuum. There is
always some cultural baggage and shared background that every native speaker is
aware of and can use as leverage during a social exchange.

Mannerisms, ways to phrase things, indirectness, politeness levels, things to
say and not to say, how to ask certain questions, how to comment on certain
things, how to break the ice, how to start and end conversations, etc. These are
all incredibly nuanced aspects of Japanese that can often feel very alien or
unfamiliar to western audiences. Furthermore, a lot of these points can be very
hard to grasp for native speakers as well because they often rely on one’s own
personal charisma, sociability, extrovertedness, and a lot of other factors.

However, do not confuse this with the sensationalist talking points of
“exoticism”  and “us vs them” mentality (Why Japanese people? etc) that certain
blogs like to write about when it comes to Japan. Japanese is a language like
any other and there’s nothing inherently special or magical to it. It does,
however, have its own social rules and etiquette that will be different from
your native language, and just like any other language you need to be able to
internalize them properly if you want to have natural output.

You might be already familiar with some common mistakes like:
 * Answering with ありがとう to a compliment instead of being modest
   (まだまだ, いえいえ, etc)
 * Not using polite language when the situation calls for it (not using
   ます/です with strangers, etc)
 * Overusing pronouns (あなた, etc)
 * Using the wrong interjections (“uhmm…” instead of “えと...”)
 * When asking for a favor, pre-emptively thanking the other person with
   ありがとうございます instead of よろしくおねがいします

…and many others.

This is also often called “thinking with your English brain”. There’s nothing
ungrammatical or necessarily wrong in it, it’s just… not what a Japanese person
would say in that situation.

## <a name="practical-activities">Practical activities to improve your Output</a>

Now that all the introductory fluff is out of the way, let’s actually get down
to the meat of it: how **does** one improve their output? Can we come up with a
series of activities that, if done with enough frequency, will lead to having
natural output ability?

While I cannot guarantee with absolute certainty that all of them will work for
you, I can say that each of the activities I describe here have helped me
improve my ability to communicate in Japanese. I’m still not quite there yet,
and it’s a very long trek of continuous gradual improvement, but they are all
good starting points that are worth considering.

### <a name="noticing">Noticing</a>

This is not a specific activity one needs to practice, however it is a
**central** pillar to all the other exercises so it is important to introduce
it first.

Practicing output will show you your weaknesses in the language. This is what I
call “noticing”. Output practice itself is a self-feeding loop not unlike the
[[58465ab9]] and will look something like this:

[![Noticing graph](./static/noticing.svg)](./static/noticing.svg)

In my experience I’ve met a lot of very different people when it comes to their
“noticing” ability. Some can be natural talents and pick up expressions and word
choices almost effortlessly by just doing input. Just like that they’ll be able
to use them more or less accurately in output too. Some other people, however,
need a bit more of an extra push to be able to figure out certain expressions
and phrases that would otherwise go unnoticed. This is where output practice
comes into play.

When you spend time practicing output, you make that jump from passive to active
knowledge awareness, and that in turn kickstarts the predictive engine in your
brain that will make you actively soak up new phrases to use in output via
immersion. Try to be consciously aware of this process as you go through each
exercise, because it will consistently benefit you a lot more if you do that.

### <a name="conversation-practice">Conversation practice</a>

This is probably the most obvious and common exercise that most people would
already be familiar with: conversation practice.

As simple as it sounds, just find someone to talk to (text chat is good too!)
and just practice. Ideally, you want a native speaker or someone who’s at native
level because that would give you the best example of natural conversational
language. This said, practicing with other learners is not necessarily a bad
thing either.

Past the very initial stages of learning (step 1 of [[58465ab9]]), every person
is fundamentally different and language learning itself is not a straight line.
Someone at approximately your same level of Japanese might be much better than
you at some specific thing, and you might be much better than them at some other
specific thing. If you regularly chat together, you can help each other
reinforce your weak points.

Just keep in mind that **most** of your conversation time should be dedicated to
native speakers. I’ve personally met many learners who only output around other
learners and even after years of doing so their Japanese still feels very
unnatural (this might not be the only reason, but I bet it does not help).

A few places you can find people to talk to:
 * Language exchange discord servers (like [[EJLX]])
 * Hire a conversational partner/tutor on italki.com
 * Language exchange apps like HelloTalk or Tandem
 * Online platforms and communities around your hobbies (If you like games,
   playing online on Japanese servers, etc)
 * VRChat

### <a name="self-corrected">Self-corrected writing</a>

I define “self-corrected writing” as any kind of (usually written) output that
you are in charge of correcting yourself.

Self-correcting is an ability that a lot of language learners don’t seem to be
aware of having. The reality of it is that getting genuine and useful
corrections from native speakers is **hard**. Most people have no interest in
correcting your mistakes as long as what you’re saying is understandable. You
may be able to find teachers or tutors that can help you fix certain problems
or mistakes if you send them your output compositions, but it’s not a reliable
method and it doesn’t “scale” to large volumes over long periods of time (it is
also not cheap if you are paying these people to correct you).

What you can do, instead, is take advantage of that internal radar you should
have by now that fires “Weird Japanese detected!” alerts every time you read
unnatural sentences. Just because you are the person that wrote them, it does
not mean that you are not able to recognize that the language **feels** wrong.

For this activity, you don’t need to be able to know **what** is wrong and
especially **how** to fix it. All you need to do is just point your internal
radar to what you wrote and let it say “this looks good” or “this does not look
good”. This is when your noticing engine will become able to pick up better
phrases **later** during immersion. Do this for a long enough time and your
ability to output will improve without requiring external assistance from native
speakers.

As already mentioned, this entire exercise relies on you having a solid grasp
of what natural Japanese looks like. If you have not trained that internal model
yet, you will not be able to take advantage of it here.

My personal tip to make this activity worthwhile is to delay your corrections
to a later time. Borrowing from the world of art (especially that of music
production), we often become able to notice our mistakes only after we let them
rest for a while before going back to them with a fresh mind. First, write some
Japanese. Then, let it sit there for an hour or two. Go back to it again and try
to answer the following questions:

 * Do you understand what the sentence is saying?
 * If not, do you at least understand what the sentence **is trying** to say?
 * Do you recognize all the words used in the sentence? Do they feel natural?
 * Is the flow of the passage logically consistent?

For this purpose, I usually try to get myself to write some Japanese in the
morning (like a blog or personal diary, scrap notes, literally anything you
feel like writing about) and then in the evening before going to sleep I go
over them and see if anything stands out.


### <a name="attentive-listening">Attentive Listening</a>

Attentive Listening is a type of specific input activity that focuses on
acquiring natural chunks of phrases by listening to audio of native speakers
using them in natural conversation.

While during normal immersion you’d just be consuming native content for the
pleasure of doing so (watching anime, livestreams, youtube videos, etc) and
nothing more, with attentive listening you should be consistently on the hunt
for “cool” phrases and expressions that you want to make yours.

For this type of activity, some learning methods talk about having a
[language parent](https://refold.la/roadmap/stage-3/a/adopt-a-parent), and if
you have one it’s great, but it’s not required. However, I do recommend
sticking to natural **unscripted** language that is conversation-driven. This
means, rather than doing this with anime or movies, try using livestreams or
podcasts where there’s at least two people having a natural-sounding
conversation. Twitch (or similar) streams that focus on gameplay might be less
optimal than categories like “just chatting” videos where the focus is more on
the streamer talking to other people (or the audience). Vtubers can also be a
good source for this type of content (if you’re into that, my personal
recommendation is the monday morning talk videos from Ookami Mio like
[this one](https://youtu.be/xtPi7ITvOcc?t=586)).

For normal immersion I usually recommend content that you are interested in and
enjoy listening to. However, since with attentive listening you should be
primarily paying attention to the **form** and the flow of the conversation
rather than its **contents**, it’s okay to choose things that are boring or not
as engaging to you as long as their type of language is similar to what you want
to mimic yourself.

What I like to do is watch videos (ideally pre-recorded rather than live,
because you can pause and rewind), and pay attention to how the speaker moves
from one topic to the next. How each sentence is connected to the whole. What
kind of back and forth (backchanneling, aizuchi, etc) happens between two
speakers. I pay attention to things like jumps and interruptions in the
conversation. What does the speaker say when it happens? **How** does he say it?

**OPTIONAL**: Using a tool like [sharex](https://getsharex.com/) I like to
record a few seconds of interesting audio for every exchange I want to acquire
and then I build anki cards with **only the audio** (no sentence, no front, no
back, etc, just the audio file). Every day I go through all those anki cards and
re-listen to what I recorded. Once I feel like I am familiar enough with that
phrasing, I just delete the card. Over long periods of time, I notice I start
using similar phrases myself in my output. It’s also okay to record similar (or
the same) expressions used in slightly different contexts.

It’s good to keep in mind that this kind of activity is relatively focus-heavy
as you need to be constantly paying attention and be on the hunt for such chunks
of language. For this reason it’s hard to keep it up for long sessions, I
recommend maybe 15 minutes a day (just my personal vibes). If you notice your
mind drifting to other stuff, getting bored, or just falling back to normal
listening, just stop and do something else. Don’t force it.

### <a name="predictive-listening">Predictive Listening</a>

Predictive listening is the natural evolution of Attentive Listening. The
premise is almost entirely the same, and so is the content you should be drawing
inspiration from (conversational videos, etc).

The only difference is that, unlike with Attentive Listening, we are not
actually looking for chunks or expressions, we’re actually trying to **predict**
how the conversation will continue before it happens. For this reason you should
be doing this on recorded videos (rather than live streams). Every time the
speaker asks a question (either to the audience or someone they are
interviewing, etc) pause the video and imagine yourself in that situation. How
would you answer that question? I don’t mean just the **contents** of the
question, but even the mannerisms you’d imagine yourself using. Do you handwave?
Nod your head? Follow up with a はい? End with a ということで? etc

Then, once you’ve done those 10 seconds of introspection, unpause the video and
notice how the other person **actually** answers it. See if it matches your
prediction, or if they do something you didn’t think of doing. What is their
facial expression? What is their reaction? Try to take in every small facet of
the conversation that is not **just** the contents of the answer itself.

### <a name="active-production">Active Production</a>

A fundamental aspect to be able to move words you learned through immersion
(passive vocab) to your everyday language (active vocab) is to be able to gauge
the emotional response that they evoke in your conversational partner.

Myself personally, there’s many words I learned by reading books that I don’t
feel comfortable outputting in a conversation because I’m not yet sure what kind
of reaction I will get from someone listening to them. I noticed very often when
the time comes that I **need** to use certain words that I’ve never used before,
I hesitate and my sentences break down and in turn become even harder to
understand for no reason other than me being uncertain about those words.

Because of this, I think there is some real benefit in trying to consciously use
certain words for the sole purpose of testing the water even if we might already
know those words aren’t natural in that context.

For this kind of activity I prefer a spoken conversation rather than chat, and
**especially** with a native speaker (you can’t trust other learner’s opinions
when it comes to this). Just practice with a language partner or a tutor, and
try to express an idea **specifically** because you want to use a certain word
you learned. See what their reaction is. Do they ask you to repeat the word? Do
they act surprised? Do they perhaps rephrase what you just said using a
different word? These are all very important signals you need to look for.

### <a name="internal-narration">Internal Narration</a>

I’ve struggled with my inability to do this for the longest of time and I feel
like I’ve only recently started to feel like I’m able to keep up with this in
Japanese like I did when I first learned English, so this kind of advice can
still be somewhat hard to properly internalize and understand depending on what
kind of learner you are and how far you are in your journey.

Furthermore, a huge chunk of the population apparently does not have an internal
monologue at all, so if you are in that group (I am not), then this tip will
probably not apply to you and you can move to the next point.

This said, the basic idea for this so-called “internal narration” activity is to
consciously shift your inner monologue to be 100% in Japanese as you go through
your everyday life. This is great to get you aware of certain words and phrases
you don’t know how to use. Try to describe what you’re doing in real time in
your head as you do it. Think “I will now brush my teeth” as you go brush your
teeth, “I am now walking the dog”, “I am making some tea and then I will play
some videogames”, “I wonder what I can make for dinner tonight”, etc.

This activity can be “dangerous” if you try to force it too early when your
internal model is still not quite ready, because it can make you internalize
certain phrases that are literally translated from English (or whatever is your
native language). However, once you’re advanced enough that you already started
outputting and putting into practice some of the activities I mentioned before,
building yourself an internal monologue can be very useful. It can help build
up your own Japanese personality and language identity which is fundamental to
become able to output naturally (more on this later).

### <a name="reading-before">Reading before going to sleep</a>

I admit, this is a bit weird, and it might be just me, but I’ve decided to write
it here anyway because it’s been great advice for myself and I’m sure it will
benefit others too (also reading is great).

There’s many well-researched benefits when it comes to reading as you’re about
to fall asleep and most of them have to do with a bunch of stuff I’m not
familiar with (brainwaves, etc) so I won’t get too much into those details.
This said, I have noticed another huge benefit in reading Japanese books right
as I am about to go to sleep, preferably on real paper or an ebook reader, not
on your phone. More often than not, as I drift asleep after having read a book,
I am much more aware of how my “Japanese brain” sounds. In my mind I go over
various phrases and words, often subconsciously, that I have just read in the
book. Sometimes when I’m very into a story (and also very tired) I notice that
my brain starts dreaming that I’m still reading, and my internal monologue
shifts to Japanese naturally as I fill in the gaps of whatever story I was
reading at the time.

### <a name="feeling-of-community">Feeling of community</a>

A feature of the language that often gets overlooked is the feeling of belonging
to a certain group or community. After years of taking conversational lessons
with a Japanese tutor, I noticed that while it gave me a good base to stand on,
it didn’t make my output any more natural or spontaneous. Going through rote
exercises or just surface level conversation is simply not enough to acquire
good natural output (at least it wasn’t for me).

A lot of defining features of what makes a language feel natural come from
subculture and situational usage that is appropriate only within certain groups
of peers you identify with.

We are much more apt at picking up expressions and jargon when we feel like we
**belong** to a group. We are part of a community, we have friends, people we
respect and want to imitate, and we also want to **be accepted** by them. All of
these aspects are necessary to make the language actually yours and create your
own Japanese personality. Without this, it is almost impossible to transition
into natural language output. See [this amazing example from Stephen Krashen](https://youtu.be/_VYfpL6lcjE?t=2368)
on the topic. __

Just as what you’d normally do to find conversation practice occasions, try to
find a place where you can “belong”. It’s probably one of the hardest tips to
put into practical use as everyone is different, but it is also one of the
**most important** things one should be aware of because just doing this will
almost entirely overshadow every other point of advice I’ve given in this page.

Specifically, try to make your output activity not a function of output itself,
but rather find a goal that is **beyond** just wanting to practice the
“language”. Find people you want to talk to because you want to discuss whatever
topic interests you. You want to discuss the latest anime episode you just
watched, you want to coordinate a raid in an MMO, you are trying to find an
easter egg in a newly-released videogame, etc. Do all of  that in Japanese, but
not **because** it’s in Japanese. Do it because from now on that is going to
become your new Japanese identity and personality. Transitioning your hobbies to
100% Japanese is not only just a function of input. It needs to become a
function of your output as well.

